This is a fascinating area of behavioral
finance, behavioral economics. The basic way to remember it is when
you think about loss aversion and the endowment effect. The endowment effect is merely
that when you own something or you've undertaken to own something,
it becomes more valuable to you. And that sounds like a really,
you say, of course, it does. It's more valuable, because I got it. But the truth is,
it's very closely related to people's feelings about loss aversion. And so
I'm going to try to put those together, give you some real life examples
of how they fit together. And hopefully, you'll get an understanding
of what we're talking about. The classic experiment for endowment theory is where you give a group
of students and we do this in our classes. Half of them you give some
mugs with their school on it. Nice and printed mugs, coffee mugs. And then the other half, you don't. And so everybody's required,
the sellers and the buyers are required to write
down the price that the buyers. How much they'd pay for the mug and
how much would the sellers part with it. So, fascinating result. Well, here and it really is. The sellers are generally going to
price the mug twice what the buyers are going to pay for it and that fits very closely with Professor
Azeal's point earlier about loss aversion. Generally speaking, if you look at
all the studies on loss aversion, there's a loss ratio. People are generally about 2.5 to 2 times
more inclined to avoid losses than worry about whether or not they've got a game. And the endowment effect is very,
very much related to that. When we own something,
we assign a higher value to it. And what's also interesting is if you
insert a third category into those buyers and sellers of those university
coffee mugs in column choosers, what's really interesting is how
closely they line up with the buyers? They don't own it. Therefore, they don't
have any real bias and their price is pretty close to what the
buyers are willing to bid for those mugs. So, that's a fascinating way of looking
at or sort of looking at how we introduce the loss aversion
along with the endowment effect. Now what's part of the endowment
effect is also a heuristic, it's a bias of the status quo bias and
where does that play into these things? Well, most likely, people, when they
own something, they're willing to say there's a set of circumstances that has
to be in place for them to part with it. The right price. The right time. There's a whole series of things
in their lives that come into place when the decision
to part with the good is. Now there's a long series of
studies about whether or not, it matters what type of good it is. And in fact, you might surmise that
the closer a good is to consumptive, i.e. Something like a bottle of wine or
something like a coffee mug where we're going to use
it that people apply more comfort in holding it or
actually wanting more money for that since they are planning to use it for
pleasure. In real life,
that also extends to trading items too. Now we find this and we're going to talk
in a few minutes about the stock market and why do people hold on to
stocks far too long when in fact, they should have gotten
rid of them before. It's a very similar principle and I think that we see it everyday
in the financial markets. So just like the availability heuristic, the status quo bias,
which of course is very much affected or very much part of the endowment
affect has evolutionary roots. I talked earlier on
the availability about how our ancestors way back when
ate a kind of a berry. Maybe it was a red berry and
they got bored with it. And so,
they decided they wanted the blueberries. Were they, did our ancestors run out and
immediately eat the blueberries? No. They had experimenters, either from their
own clan or others to try them first and we're descended from folks who
tried them second or third and they didn't die of poisoning. So, that's essentially
where it all comes from. It is that mentality that we really do not
want to take the loss or in that case, the big loss. It has a lot to do with why we
hold on to things well past when, perhaps we should have gotten rid of them. So, let's talk a little bit about how
the endowment effect plays in real life. So if losses loom larger than gains,
then sellers typically will feel a greater loss than giving up
their in the case of the coffee mugs. They'll feel a greater loss in giving up
those mugs than the buyers would feel pleasure in getting them and that's
the differential we're talking about. And again, it's 2, 2.5 times ratio. So, that's why sellers set a higher price. They're trying to offset since with
their negative utility of having to give up that suddenly precious item,
because they own it. And it's more, two times as much as
the positive utility that would be experienced by buyers to acquire that mug
and the price that the buyers put on it. And so it's a really important point,
because what happens typically if you want to try to
inoculate yourself against this endowment effect,
which carries with it the status quo bias. You need to think more like traders think,
good traders that is. Most traders think in terms of what
are my options regardless of ownership? In other words, a good trader will think, what else could I do with my money
right now than buy this mug? That's a rational way of
fighting the endowment effect, both as a buyer and seller. So the seller should think, maybe 7 bucks or
6 bucks is too high for this. Maybe there's something else
I could do with the money, even $3 since I just got this mug. That's another way of
looking of how you fight it. Another, there's been some early
interesting studies on this. The economist John List and this shows
you, I think the fun part of behavior finance is that a lot of the studies that
come in real life are they're fascinating. They look into fascinating
arcania of society. Here's what he studied,
the very imminent economist. He studied baseball card conventions,
because he found some really interesting endowment effects in
baseball card conventions. He found, for example,
that folks who brought their cards for the first few times to these conventions
had a really hard time selling. They couldn't part with that
Babe Ruth 1935 card even though they're offered
a very nice price for it. And what happened overtime, interestingly
enough is unlike some of the biases that we have discussed and
will discuss in this course. You can actually get better at
trading by experiencing it. And so one of the things he
discovered is the more conventions, an owner of card attended,
the better they got finally at trading. They saw others doing it. They saw examples et cetera, et cetera. That's a really important part
of message about business. Often, we learn our most valuable
lessons from watching others who know what they're doing. I say that sometimes to students, they
think, of course, but think about that. How many of us should seek role models and
don't? Or we should ask for more advice, because we're afraid people would think we
don't know what we're talking about, but that's in truly all wrapped up in
the status quo endowment bias. We know we should do something else,
but we're incapable of doing it, but we should ask for help and
that's essentially the way to fight it.