Okay, so Mental Accounting and
Expenditures. You've already heard, I think, a little
bit about the effects of mental accounting and how, for example, they can wreak
havoc on an investment strategy. If you have the wrong framing, the wrong reference points in how
you look at your investments, you can make some huge mistakes,
as Professor Rasiel's already pointed out. I'm going to focus a little bit
today on mental accounting and expenditures, which is
the other side of the coin. It's our willingness to go spend money,
and how we think about it,
in terms of consumer choices. But it's also good to remind yourself of the basic principles
of prospect theory here. Because remember, almost everything we
talk about is in terms of loss aversion. Another way of putting it
is how people differentiate between costs and losses. And in fact they're economically the same. However, the mental accounting for
those is vastly different. Economic folks will always tell you, they lump those two in the same category,
but not so with humans. And so for example, when we make large
expenditures like a house or a car, or something like that, it's,
sales people have noticed that we will add options that we
normally wouldn't add on their own. That fancy touch screen in
the back of the car for the kids, or the third row that you don't
really have enough kids to justify that, but it sounds great, right? You're willing to pay for it because you've already made
a very large outlay for the car. And so car salesmen understand that. That's a heuristic they know quite well. They're willing to take
you into that room and try to get you to add tons of options
which seem to not cost very much, the 1,000 bucks here,
500 there, but it adds up. You'd never make those
purchases on their own. But you make them because you've already
invested the money in a big car and you're thinking, okay, this is nothing. So think about that in
terms of sticker shock, where you've got all the furniture
in the house you need. But if you think about it, you might add
some more pieces anyway, because you've already paid $300,000 for the house,
let's really make this thing special. Those are examples of how we use mental accounting to essentially
make behavioral cost mistakes, right? So where does it come from? There's a famous, for
those sports fans of you out there, It comes from the loss aversion world. And we think about that in terms of
the loss ratio discussed earlier, where people are about two and
half times, on average, willing to avoid a loss as
opposed to try to get a gain. And it happens a lot, for example,
there's a classic study done on the PGA Tour where some die-hard sports
scientists, social scientists I guess, filmed over 10,000 putts from pro
players over an eight-year period. And what was fascinating was that
when you had a ten-foot putt and it was categorized as
the ten-foot putt was for a par, which is a normal score, par for
the course, or if it was for a birdie, which of course is exceeding
the par, in terms of accounting, doing better on that hole,
you will find that pro golfers, two and a half times, will make that par putt,
as opposed to going for the birdie putt. They don't want to lose the hole. They want to, they're not willing
to sacrifice the chance for the par, so that they're too
aggressive in going for the birdie. That's a perfect example of loss aversion. Another way from the sports world is,
think about, you were given a pair of great tickets for the playoffs, the NBA
playoffs, and you're near your hometown. And unfortunately, a very late snow
occurred and you're on your way to it. And you also know that your friend just
bought a very expensive pair of tickets. And it's 15, 16 inches of blizzard. Of the two people, who do you think
are likely to show up at the game, right? It's probably going to be the guy who
spent a lot of money getting those tickets, not you. You're probably going to go find
the closest, warmest bar, and you're going to watch it on TV since
your tickets were free anyway. It's a perfect example of consumer
mental accounting that plays into our everyday behavior. So, let's talk about it. The best way to describe it in
terms of consumer experience is in terms of thinking about it
in terms of bundling, I think. When you have a $30,000 purchase and you add $10,000 of add-ons, your so-called disutility is small. And we're going to show you
graphs that can illustrate this. But it's fascinating how people, once they've made the decision
to spend a lot of money, they'd be willing to make incremental purchases
that actually add up to a large number. That's how consumerism works. And it's fascinating because,
of course, it has psychological and finance implications not only for us as
consumers, but for the economy as a whole. However, fascinating,
if you unbundle those purchases, if you make someone, for example, go into a showroom and buy that nice
$50,000 or $30,000 car, whatever it is. Then about a month later say, gee we've got all these items that could
make your car enjoyment ever greater, and it's 10,000 bucks, you'd be surprised
how many people refuse that expense. They've already sunk the cost. They've already begun the enjoyment. And all of a sudden that $10,000 extra is an increment that has a lot
of disutility attached to it. As opposed to if it was
attached at the initial sale, then there was very low
disutility with it. And think about that,
another consumer aspect of it. I mentioned this earlier but
it happens all the time, for example when you go buy things like
computers and electronics or TVs or things like that, the salespeople
want you to buy those warranties. And firms like Best Buy and Apple, with its AppleCare and all that,
they make an incredible amount of money. It's a very high-margin product to sell, essentially an insurance policy that's
going to most likely expire worthless. And so it's an important part as you
as a consumer to think about that. Why are you over-weighting
the odds that your new electronics item is going to break or
go bad in a period of time when you're probably
going to go buy another one anyway? And studies have been shown, if you
forego insurance your entire lifetime, it'll be an amazing number, you will find
that you'll be having to buy other items, if you forego all those warranties and
the insurance. And we're going to get into this
a little bit more later down the road.