The weighting function tells us we
overweight low probability events. And later, we'll see that there
are other situational factors that cause us to overweight low
probability events even more. We underweight high probability events,
especially events that are so common that we don't hear about
them much in the newspapers. People die in car wrecks at a rate
of around 50,000 a year in the US, we don't really think about that. Because sadly, but true. Car wrecks are somewhat commonplace. So we don't hear a lot about them in the
media almost, because they happen a lot. We tend to be less
sensitive to changes and probability in the middle of the range. Moving from a 30% probability to
a 40% doesn't affect this that much. But moving from 0 to 10% or
90% to certainty, those are much bigger impacts. Let's just finish this with
a couple of quick examples. Catastrophe potential. We really, really have an increased
perception of risk for activities that may injure or kill a large number of people
violently and immediately. If we've seen an example of that
in the past like I said earlier, a lot of Americans switched to
driving from flying after 9/11. Because the immediacy, the drama,
the horror of being in a plane or imaging being in a plane was so
great even though the probability after 9/11 that you were going to be killed
on a flight was infinitely lower, because security was raised so much. People moved to cars, they didn't
realize that what they were doing was increasing the catastrophic
potential of driving as a result. Interestingly, people
are less likely to be subjectively affected
by risks in which they feel like they have some expertise
from a financial perspective. If I pick somebody or
a mutual fund to manage my money and I know the portfolio manager there, and
he's a friend, and he's a good guy. I might let him take more of my money
to invest than I would with some random portfolio manager I had never met. What I'm doing there is
assigning some expertise to myself in picking a good
guy to manage my money. So it seems somehow,
I'm more willing to take that risk. Familiarity too,
something that we're used to doing. We don't tend to over assign risk to it. So, I don't know. Let's say, you're a surfer. And you want to go surfing those really,
really big waves in Australia where once every ten years, they have some massive,
massive waves out there. If you are not a surfer, that would seem
like the probability of a catastrophic outcome from that would
be absolutely huge. But if you're an expert surfer,
you know you can handle it. It's really familiar environment to you. It just doesn't seem that risky to you. If anything, in fact, you might
underweight the risk in that context. So, a final example of where we might
see people putting lower subjective probability weight is when they choose
to engage in a certain type of activity. Imagine that you have voluntarily chosen
to be part of some sort of medical trial, simply because you know that it's for
a drug that's important for many people and you want to be
part of helping make that happen. So you're involved in a trial that
actually, there is a small amount of risk involved in receiving that
medical product that's being tested. But because you have volunteered
to be engaged in this, you're not excessively overweighting
the risky probability, because it's your choice to get
involved in the first place.