We're going to talk about
the omission bias area and we're going to have a case study. And then we'll start with one comes
from the public heath sector. It's a fascinating one and a deals with the way polio was
treated back in the 50s and 60s. And prior to the advent of the polio
vaccines back in the 1950s, there were widespread polio epidemics
which were an almost annual occurrence. In the vast majority of cases the symptoms
of polio were relatively mild and patients made a full recovery. In perhaps one in 100 cases, however,
polio results in paralysis including loss of use of one or both arms and
legs and sometimes permanently. Because of this Polio is known
as infantile paralysis or IP. Now some patients also lose the ability
to breath without a respirator, which is also a terrible
by product of disease. In the 1950s, two polio vaccines were
developed at around the same time. The first of these developed by Jonas
Salk, for whom the vaccine takes it's name, uses an inactive or
killed version of the polio virus. Now this vaccine is not
100% effective however, children who receive the Salk vaccine
still have a small chance of contracting polio if exposed to the infection. In the late 1950's, Albert Sabin attempted
to improve on the Salk virus using an active form of the virus. The Sabin vaccine was
introduced in the 1960s and provides one hundred percent
protection against the disease. In very rare cases, however, Sabin has been known to cause polio,
because it is a live virus. Nonetheless, when these
vaccines were first developed. The likelihood of contracting polio
directly from the Sabin vaccine was considerably smaller than
that of contracting polio in the community after
having the Salk vaccine. Thus, in the early days
of the polio vaccine, and Sabin was the recommended choice. Because Sabin protects everyone from
catching polio from someone else. The very few unfortunate children
who contracted the disease from the vaccine itself, could not then
transfer it to other vaccinated children. By 1999, however, the incidence of polio
in the overall population was so low. Because of the success of the Sabin
vaccine at the center for disease control, the CDC,
issued a recommendation that all pediatricians should switch
to the Salk vaccine exclusively.