A lot of times we will find people
confused a relationship between two events and
think that one is causing the other. When in fact all that's happening is that
both of them are being driven by some external factor. I give you kind of a silly example. It happens to be the case that more people are bitten by sharks at times
when more ice cream is being sold. So, a crazy correlation causation
error would be to assume that because those two are related to
each other that eating ice cream and then going swimming happens to make
you more attractive to sharks. Clearly nonsense, obviously
there's some other external factor that's driving both of those, and that
very simply is just the heat of the sun. We're out swimming in
the sea where sharks are, at times when it's hot we're more likely
to eat ice cream at times when it's hot. No one's really going to
make that mistake, but we'll see as we go through the entire
course there are any number of places. Where people mistake correlation
being driven by some other factor, the heat of the sun, the causation eating
ice cream makes you attractive to sharks. Here is a great standard example from
the financial markets, when equity prices are going up, when the market
is doing well, and the S&P is rising. Guess what? Most investors are making money,
not that surprising. Most investors are going to
make money with their equities. When equity prices in
general are going up. But what we tend to do, and what we
see happen a lot, is people mistake this correlation between the equity
markets going up in general, and therefore my equity
investment's going up. People confuse that for causation. And tend to assume that they're
smarter with their investments than they actually are, look I'm making
money I must be a really smart investor no dude a rising tide
floats all boats okay. The equity markets are going up and
you own equities Guess what? You're going to make money. Saying it objectively like
this in this quiet context it may seem ridiculous to you that
people would actually make that mistake. Count on it. People make that mistake even professional
traders make that mistake all the time. I want to take us through
a slightly more complex example of a slightly different problem. And the reason I want to do this is the
example that we're going to go through is specifically one of the key causes of
the massive financial down turn in 2008. So being able to deconstruct
part of why 2008 happened is in fact a key goal of this class. So lets go through this example and
see where we go. In this case, it's not Not going to
be a correlation causation error. It's not people thinking that their
intelligence is causing their equity portfolio to go up. It's almost the opposite. We're going to look here at
an invisible correlation error. We're going to look at a situation
where people don't think that outcomes are correlated or related to each
other, but it turns out they actually are. So let's start with a quick
explanation of how mortgages work. It's not that hard. I want to buy a house. I need to borrow $200,000. So I go to the bank,
they lend me $200,000. And for
the remaining 30 years of the mortgage, the bank will tell me exactly what dollar
amount I need to pay to them every month to cover the interest on the mortgage. And also to reduce the principal
on the mortgage so at the end of the 30 years the house is
completely mine, I've paid it all off. Quick note by the way and
again this is a finance class so lets not forget finance for a moment,
in general mortgages don't last 30 years. Why not because most people
don't live in the same home for 30 years, they tend to move house so
on average. Or if interest rates are coming down, they may find that they can refinance into
a mortgage that has a lower interest rate. So actually, on average,
mortgages last about ten years. That's just a little detail. Okay, so until, a quick history lesson
here on mortgages, until around 2001, the vast majority of mortgages that
were issued by banks Went to people. To families that were
considered prime borrowers. Prime in finance terms really
usually just means good quality. The people who were getting
mortgages had proven savings. And they probably had to use some
of those savings to put in a down payment on the house. They had proven monthly income. They had a job. And they had a proven credit history, historically the credit card
companies got their payments on time. This is not somebody who'd gone five
months without making a payment or had been repeatedly overdrawn
from their bank Account. Okay, so if I'm making loans, it makes
sense to me that I'm going to lend money to people that have a proven quality
to make their loan payments on time. And have a proven likelihood
of income going forward so they will be able to make
their future payments. It's on time. However, actually sorry, before I go there let's also talk
about a couple of quick historical situations over the last 40 years or
so, 50 years. Up until 2007 It was very, very unusual to see all
house prices in general across the US all go
down in value together. The last time we really saw that was in
the 1930s during the Great Depression. Guess what? Most people who are alive right now,
don't actually remember the 1930s. So for all of the banks and
other lenders who are making loans, they tended to assume, prior to 2007. That it would never be the case,
that all price, house prices, across the entire
US would go down together. And this is where our invisible
correlation comes into it. So let's see what happened when suddenly banks and savings and loans and other lending companies started to lend
to borrowers who are not primed, okay. They started to lend to borrowers
who did not have good savings. Who did not have proven income and who did
not necessarily have a good credit rating. Now there's a big question about why lenders started doing
that in the first place. I don't want to get into
a lot of details on that. It's not relevant to what
we're talking about., but I will say there was
a Political piece to it. In the late nineties some legislation
came through Congress that said lenders need to work harder at making loans to
slightly lower credit quality people. They wanted to push the idea of the
American dream and homeownership for all. But, let's just come back
to the finance Of this. Suddenly, from 2001 onwards,
a lot more loans were made to people who had lower credit quality. Those people were more likely
to default on their loans. They were more likely to
miss a mortgage payment in a way that prime
borrowers typically don't. On average, prime borrowers if
you look over history about 1-2% of prime borrowers in any given year will
fail to make their mortgage payments. With sub-prime, borrowers who did
not have high credit quality or good income The probability of them
missing a loan payment became much higher. Okay, now I am going to explain a product
called a mortgage back security. You may also have heard the term CDO. Here's how they work. Let's imagine that we have one mortgage
from every single state in the US. Pool all those mortgages together. Every one of those fifty mortgages will
be making a certain payment every month. Now, if we pool all of those 100 mortgages
together and take the payments each month. And then you sell this product, this mortgage backed security to
investors who want to make money from it. So they're paying a dollar amount now, the
investors it's as if they're all, all of the investors of this product are pooling
their money together to make those loans. And then, for every mortgage as
the money comes in each month that money gets passed through to the
investors who own this parcel of loans. What the ratings companies did,
what the investment banks did and with the help of the rating agencies,
was to break up those big pools of mortgages into
different credit quality. Let's suppose we assume
that only a really, really small number of people are likely
to default on their mortgage loans. Those defaults would have gone through
to what we call the Tripe B tranche. The that you see here on the graph go from triple a to double a to
single a to triple b, and we have pools of mortgages
at each of those levels. So the triple b is the lower the more
risky and it has five mortgages in it. If any of the mortgages default,
the first mortgage that defaults it's the triple B Tranche that's
going to miss a payment that month. If five of the fifty mortgages default,
the triple B Tranche, the guy who bought that Tranche,
won't get any cashflows this month. He knows that he's carrying higher
risk than the guys up above him. And if the borrowers don't default, he will actually end up with a better
rate of return than the other tranches. It's set up that way,
the mortgage bank security is set up so that the lower credit tranches expect to get a higher rate of return,
slightly larger cash flows every period. But if there's a difficult
they're the ones that miss, Okay. So up five defaults out of 50,
up to 10% of Default. The only person that loses
out is the Triple B Tranche. If however,
a sixth mortgage in that pull defaults. Suddenly the Single A Tranche is going to
get a little bit less money this month. And the same again, if we go all
the way up to 10 defaults out of 50, both the triple B, and the double A and the Single A have stop getting
any payments what so ever. And so
on all the way up to the AAA tranche, which has 30 of the 50 mortgages in it. It would need 21 of these
mortgages to default before the AAA tranche loses any money. As far as the models were concerned that
these investment bankers put together whether or
not there would be defaults of that much. All of the model said it was impossible that more that 5 or
10 of those mortgages whatever default. Okay?
2 reasons for that, one. Historically, prime quality mortgages
simply did not default that much. They underestimated the extent
to which subprime mortgages, mortgages issued to lower credit quality
people who didn't have good income. They underestimated the extent to
which those mortgages would default. And then, there's another piece to this. If house prices continue to go up and we're in a strong economy,
if one of those subprime borrowers all of a sudden can't make
his payments on his mortgage anymore. There was an exit opportunity
that that borrower had. The exit opportunity was
he's go back to the bank and he'd literally swap the old mortgage for
a new mortgage. Because if the price of the house was
going up, the value of that house more than compensated for
moving into a new mortgage. So in that case, even though that particular mortgage
borrower was about to default. It wasn't a problem for this mortgage-backed security
because he would effectively sell his house at a profit getting yet
another mortgage somewhere else. And then, the Triple B tranche investor, would get the big lump sum that comes
from that borrower selling his house. That is another piece of these
mortgage backed securities, remember that we said earlier that
most mortgages don't last 30 years. So if somebody stops making mortgage
payments, And they go and sell their house and all of those triple three borrowers
are still going to get cash flow. It doesn't count like a default. The only time it counts like a default,
is if the borrower doesn't make his mortgage payment and
he can't sell his house. And what happened in 2007 was that, actually house prices started going
down slightly in around 2006. But by 2007 and late 2007 especially,
house prices all across the country. We're going down. Okay? No one had seen that before. We'd never seen house prices all
the way from Florida on the East coast to California on the West coast. But all of these house
prices started going down. So we've got subprime borrowers who
are more likely to default anyway. And if they do run out of money,
the option for them to just sell their house and
pay off the mortgage. That way is no longer
available because suddenly the house that they bought for
$200,000 is now only worth $150,000. So if they sell that house,
that's $50,000 of that loan that they can't pay off because
they don't have the money themselves. The invisible correlation
here is the completely unexpected affect that this
happened in all 50 states. Remember what I said at the beginning,
each one of those 50 mortgages comes from a different state,
if California had a house price collapse. The sub prime borrowers in
California might have defaulted, but you would think that wouldn't
affect the borrower in Florida, his house price is still doing fine. Okay, which again is a reason
why you might only expect five at most of these
mortgages to default. But no, every single state, for every one of these borrowers,
the prices of houses are going down. And they don't have much income, so they're defaulting on
their mortgage payments. And selling their house is not
going to pay off the loan. That's the hidden correlation,
house prices all across the US went down together, and
guess what as many as 40 and 50. And even 60% of these sub prime borrowers
were defaulting on their loans. And couldn't sell their house for enough
to pay off the balance of the loan, and hence the subcrime mortgage crisis.