Okay, we've learned in the course so
far about base rate neglect. Its evil twin is the notion,
the belief of perseverance or another way you could call
it is belief persistence. Persistence often happens for
example in the markets where someone's afraid to sell a loser of a stock that
everyone seems to be negative on, except this particular analyst. You've been taught in this course, it's almost always from a tax advantage
basis and the otherwise to sell losers. Yet, belief perseverance
is a huge problem and we're going to go back
to the health sector. Again, I'm going to emphasize just
how big that sector is to global GDP, it's a vast majority if you look
out in the realm of 2018 to 2025. It'll be the majority of every taxpayer
dollar spent in the United States. So looking at healthcare problems here and in other places is extremely good
teaching for behavior commands. So, let's look at one that's actually
a very real case of the measles, and the days before measles vaccines,
epidemics occurred every two or three years. United States, several million children
caught measles during each epidemic and hundreds of thousands died. Measles still ranks among the top
ten causes of death in less developed countries. And it kills about one million
children per year worldwide. Following the introduction of the measles
vaccine in 1963, however, measle incidence dropped dramatically in the U.S.
and other countries that used the vaccine. In the 70s,
a new combined vaccine for measles, mumps and rubella, called the MMR vaccine,
was introduced and quickly became the standard for
children's inoculation programs. Measles outbreaks are now extremely
rare in communities that have vaccination programs. In 1998, however, a report in
the highly respected British medical journal the Lancet suggested a possible
link between MMR vaccine and autism. In a huge public outcry
ensued all over Europe but particularly in Britain, where the issue
took on a national importance, especially after Prime Minister
Tony Blair's refusal to confirm whether his young son had
been vaccinated or not. Thousands of British parents demanded that
their children receive three separate vaccines, one for measles, mumps, and rubella, despite medical concern
that the individual vaccine offers less protection against
measles than the combined version. Further, the absence of a product license
for the individual measles vaccine meant that it was not available in
the UK's national health system or their medicare system leading to national
shortages, months-long waiting list, and huge price increases with
clinics charges much as 280 pounds. Back then about $450 for a single vaccine. Some parents even took day trips to
France in search of doctors who had supplies of the measles vaccine. By 2002, ongoing media frenzy had
substantially increased the number of parents refusing the combine vaccine. And inevitably, guess what happened? Measles struck. Outbreaks reached epidemic proportions
in several European countries including the UK, Ireland and Italy. Even children whose parents absolutely
intended to go through the triple vaccine were at risk since the MMR vaccine cannot
safely be administered in children who are at least a year old. Higher rates in measles in the community
meant that young babies were at increased risk of exposure. What's interesting is the Lancet article
that had generated all this fear and picked up in the mainstream media all
over the world had merely suggested an association between the MMR vaccine and
autism. It had not implied that
the vaccine causes autism. And further, the paper analyzed
case histories of just 12 children. 12. Talk about the law of small numbers. Noting that the onset of behavioral
symptoms was associated by the parents with measles, mumps, and rubella vaccination in eight
of the twelve children. The tone of the article was cautious. It said, we did not prove an association
between measles, mumps, and rubella vaccine and
the syndrome described. And conclude that further investigations
are needed to examine the syndrome and its possible relation to the MMR vaccine.