Welcome to Behavioral Finance. We're excited to be doing this course and we're excited to share all
this material with you. Let me give you a brief introduction. I'm an Economics Professor at Duke. I primarily teach finance as well as,
of course, behavioral finance. Prior to doing my PhD, I was actually a derivatives trader
at an investment bank for many years. One of the things that I've found
most fun learning more recently about behavioral finance is I see old mistakes
that I made when I was a trader and I can laugh at the history of myself
who was making those mistakes. Chances are if I went back into trading,
I'd still make those mistakes again, but at least I'd know I was making them. So, there's something to
be learned from that. I'm going to be joined in this course
by a colleague, John Forlines. John's a money manager based in New York. He's also an adjunct professor at
Duke in our economics department. Where he teaches a very
interdisciplinary course about the intersection of behavioral finance and
literature. So, people sometimes call
economics the dismal science. You may have heard that sad,
sad term, the dismal science. Our idea of being funny in economics
is to respond to that by saying, if you think our science is dismal,
you should hear our poetry. But here's the cool thing about
behavioral finance, it's not dismal. It's actually just a whole load of fun. We're going to play a ton of
games over the next 14 weeks. We're going to kind of almost, but
not quite trick you into making mistakes. But the point of doing
that is not to trick you, it's to show you how easy it
is to make those mistakes. And hopefully, show you how you can
correct some of those mistakes. Some of them are easier
to fight than others. There's lots of them and every single one of you is going
to make some of those mistakes. And again,
hopefully learn from those mistakes. We're not doing it to laugh at you,
we're doing it to help you learn. We're doing it to help you learn and
because it's fun to laugh at you, because we made those mistakes ourselves
way back and we're learning to fight against them and we want you to help
fight against those mistakes as well. Some of the biases that we talk
about are actually easy to break once you know they exist. Others are just so hard wired into our
consciousness that even though you know that there, you kind of can't break them
and that's another piece of this course. What are the biases? Which ones can we remove? What changes can we make in our behavior,
so that the decisions that we are making
are more optimal for us as investors. And frankly, more broadly than that
as people who live in the world. As people who make decisions
not just about wealth, but also about health and happiness and
the working and living with others. What are some of these mistakes
that we can control for? And how can we go forward and
make better decisions in our lives? So, this is about fun. This is about learning. This is about games and tricks. At the top end of that, all over again,
this is about learning by having fun.